in this lesson i want to look at the
various data movement and migration
options we have available to get our
data into and maybe out of azure because
many times we already have data
we have some data on premises now
depending on
how we have that data how it's used how
it's communicated to and how we want to
use it in the cloud we have different
options
now a very common type of data we often
have on premises is i think about wire
file shares
i have an smb file share and that file
share is hosted on a windows file server
now in azure
our equivalent service would be
azure files
in azure files i can create a file share
and i can access via smb
now i might have multiple file servers
at different locations
and the most useful service that i can
leverage here
is azure
file sync
and what i have here is the ability
to create a sync group
so i create a sync group
i register the servers with the sync
group i believe i can have up to a
hundred of these server endpoints
i shall do this in green so we have our
server endpoints
which are windows
server based file servers so i can have
up to 100 at time of recording
i can have one
cloud endpoint
and i put these
into this
sync group and now what this does is
all of my
smb file shares
well they synchronize
to
the file share in azure now they are
syncing to the azure file share they
don't ever sync to each other so it's
all via this file share but this now
means well i have my data here it's now
got replicated to this azure files base
share that i can integrate this with
azure id kerberos or azure ad domain
services i have multiple options
available to me
if this has a problem hey i can access
this it's also keeping in sync my other
windows-based smb file servers
if i just want to move the data hey i
set up azure file sync then i can turn
these off or maybe i just want to keep
them available and this is for
resiliency purposes
additionally i can do something called
cloud
tiering
and what this says is i have a choice
either when i reach a certain threshold
of free space i am running out
it can start
offloading
the least access data
only to be on the azure file share it
still has a basically a link to it if i
talk to this as a user i still see the
data if i access it it brings it back
down
or i could say hey if it's not been used
for a certain amount of time it's not
been used for 60 days just tear it off
to the cloud as well
so this is a great solution
if i want to move
my data
if i want to just keep it synchronized
for resiliency purposes
um or i just want that overall solution
to keep maybe other windows-based file
servers synchronized with each other
now there are other methods as well
maybe remember there's other types of
storage in azure there's blob there's
files there's database services
so another really useful tool we have is
azure storage explorer
so azure storage explorer
this is a nice graphical tool
so in this tour you can see i can easily
see all of my different storage accounts
i might have available
i can go and look at my various blob
containers
and from here
you'll notice well i can upload
a
folder i could upload specific files
i can also select content to download
so this is very useful for maybe one-off
type interactions of putting some
content in bringing it down i can also
change the tier notice i can also
interact with my file shares i can do
the same idea of uploading
folders and files or downloading
and it also lets me interact with cues i
can add a message dequeue a message and
also lets me interact with tables i can
add various key value pairs
to the content of it so storage explorer
lets me really interactively
hey upload and download content
now additionally in the azure portal if
i look at a storage account you'll see
this option
of storage browser this is doing a very
similar thing
once again i can go and look at my blog
containers
i could go and select it
and notice i can upload
i have those same concepts this is
directly within the portal itself
so the azure storage explorer and the
storage browser
these are great for interacting
interactively i want a visual view i'm
dragging and dropping
files and folders to interact with that
so we have the idea of
storage explorer
very useful for those ad hoc
interactions where it's probably a
smaller amount of data
so this is very much
interactive
now what about if i want to maybe
automate maybe it's a very large scale
maybe i want to do it as part of some
unattended job
so then we have a z copy
so a z copy is really useful for
automation scenarios
an az copy can be used both to copy the
data
but it can also be set up to sync so hey
what's changed on my local or my target
and here's a powerful thing
yes it can copy from my local
area to the cloud or vice versa
but it can also do
kind of cloud to cloud
and when it does cloud to cloud in azure
it's server-side
the data does not
copy down to my machine and back up
again
it goes directly between the storage
accounts in azure so it's going to be
very fast very performant but i can also
use it to do things like well hey
i want to be able to copy from aws
from gcp
so it gives me the ability to take data
from aws from gcp and bring it into
azure storage so it's really useful for
not just hey data movements from
on-premises to azure or vice versa but
from other clouds and also between
storage accounts i have so this is a
super useful utility for automation
what about if i want to move virtual
machines
so if i want to use for example entire
virtual machines maybe databases
we have azure migrate
so azure migrate yes vm
database
it will actually go and do an
investigation and assessment of the
current usage the current specification
of that source workload if it's a vm we
could be
vmware it could be hyper-v it could
actually be
a bare metal operating system it doesn't
even have to be
a virtual machine
assess it recommend the right sku to use
in azure
replicate it to azure and then it can
cut over for a database does the same
assessment synchronization and then i
can do the cut over so these are really
powerful tools so we have azure file
sync storage explorer az copy and azure
migrate now all of these tools
we really think of as online
the data copy the interaction is
happening over the network
then there are also offline
maybe i don't have the bandwidth
available
maybe i don't want to maybe it would
take too long
and so from an offline perspective
you'll often hear about
azure
data
box
now there are different versions of this
there's azure databox disk
so the azure database disk these are as
the name suggests i think it's between a
one and five solid state disks get
shipped to you they're fully encrypted
they're currently eight terabytes each
and i just copy the data so this is
about importing into azure i cannot get
data out of azure with this
so they send me the disks i copy my data
i ship them back they bring it into my
storage account and there's other
services that actually supports as well
and then there's just regular azure data
box
so that can be both import
and export
this is a box it's about 50 pounds um it
has 80 terabytes of data after the
resiliency and they ship me this box i
plug it into my network i then copy to
it using smb or nfs i then ship it back
and when i place the order for this i
specified storage accounts that i wanted
data to be able to go to
on the box when it arrives on premises
i'll see different shares that
correspond to those storage accounts and
then when it goes back they copy the
data into those storage accounts that i
specified
this just ships via regular kind of
fedex ups
and then there is
a data box
heavy
so
if this was i i think i said it was um
like 80 terabytes
and it's 50 pounds well the data box
heavy is
770 terabytes
but it's 500 pounds this ships via
freight it's this massive thing that
will get rolled into your data center
but if i do have just a huge amount of
data to move offline i do that it works
exactly the same way rc shares and
storage account i copy to it and then it
ships back via freight and they bring it
into my storage accounts but obviously
because it's shipping freight there's
longer times there
so we really have these different
options for data movement offline is the
various azure data box azure databox
azure databox heavy or azure databox
disk and then online hey if it's smb
based azure file sync is great for that
i can interactively use storage explorer
if i want to automate things or do
synchronization not just copies we have
easy copy and then for os based
workloads be it a vmware vm or hyper vvm
or bare metal os or for databases and we
have azure migrate so those are some of
the key
data movement and migration options
available